\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename divine.info
@settitle Divine User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Divine: (divine).     Modal editing interface.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Divine User Manual
@author Thibault Polge
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Divine User Manual

Divine is a lightweight and extensible modal interface for Emacs, with
support for Vim-like text objects.  It provides a complete and
customizable user interface for text editing, inspired by Emacs
default bindings, and a simple programming interface for designing new
commands, motions, operators and modes.  Its core framework is
completely isolated and can be reused to create completely new modal
interfaces from scratch.

@html
    <p>This manual is available in the following formats</p>
    <ul>
    <li><a href="divine.html">HTML, all in one page</a></li>
    <li><a href="index.html">HTML, one page per section</a></li>
@end html

This manual is for Divine version 0.0 (git fatal: aucun nom trouvé, impossible de décrire quoi que ce soit.).

@quotation
Copyright @copyright{} 2020 Thibault Polge <thibault@@thb.lt>

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

@end quotation

@lisp
;; Redefine the Key: list item style
    (defun org-texinfo+key-item (item contents _info)
      (concat (org-texinfo+maybe-begin-list item 'table)
              (let ((head (match-string 2 contents))
                    (body (substring contents (match-end 0))))
                (if (string-match ", " head)
                    (let ((key (substring head 0 (match-beginning 0)))
                          (cmd (substring head (match-end 0))))
                      (format "\
    @@kindex %s
    @@cindex %s
    @@item @@kbd@{%s@} @@tie@{@}@@tie@{@}@@tie@{@}@@tie@{@}%s
    %s" key cmd key cmd body))
                  (error "Bad Key item %s" head)))))
@end lisp

@example
org-texinfo+key-item
@end example
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Installation::
* A Tour of Divine::
* Editing with Divine::
* Extending Divine::
* The core Divine framework::
* Reading Divine docstrings::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Manual installation::
* Install from Melpa::
* Install from Git, with Borg: Install from Git with Borg. 
* Install from Git, with Straight: Install from Git with Straight. 

Editing with Divine

* Motion commands::
* Operators::
* Text objects::
* Actions::
* Modes::
* Commands::

Motion commands

* Standard motion commands::

Text objects

* Scopes and scoped motions::    Using standard motions as text objects
* Pure text objects::            Objects that cannot be use as motions
* Special text object::          The special balanced expression text object

Extending Divine

* Key bindings::
* Creating actions::
* Creating operators::
* Creating motions and text objects::
* Creating hybrid bindings::
* Using the numeric argument::

Key bindings

* Adding and removing bindings::
* Keybindings evaluation order::

The core Divine framework

* Starting Divine: Starting Divine (1). 
* Modes and normal modes::
* Creating modes::
* Activating modes::
* State and keeping state::
* Operators and the pending operator state::
* Operator pending mode::
* Mode switching and transient modes::
* Scopes internals::
* Key binding interface internals::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@strong{Divine is beta software.}

Divine is a lightweight and extensible modal interface for Emacs, with
support for Vi-like text objects, but designed to integrate as
naturally as possible with plain Emacs.

The first visible nchange Divine brings is the introduction of a
so-called “normal” mode, where letter keys don't insert the
corresponding letters into the buffer, but run commands.  But the most
fundamental change is the decoupling of operators and text objects, so
that @emph{what} you want to do and what you want to act @emph{on} are different
part of the command input.  Standard Emacs, for example, has multiple
commands to delete text, depending on what you want to delete: up to
the end of the word, to the end of the line, the region, and so on.
Divine has only one, @code{divine-kill}, bound to @samp{k} by default.  When you
call divine-kill, it kills the region at point, if there's one; if
there isn't, it sets the mark at the point and waits for the next
motion command to delete all text between point and mark.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@menu
* Manual installation::
* Install from Melpa::
* Install from Git, with Borg: Install from Git with Borg. 
* Install from Git, with Straight: Install from Git with Straight. 
@end menu

@node Manual installation
@section Manual installation

Clone the source repository somewhere in your @code{load-path}, and convert
this manual to texinfo by running:

@example
makeinfo --no-split divine.texi -o divine.info
install-info divine.info --dir=dir
@end example

Then load Divine from Emacs

@lisp
(require 'divine)
(divine-global-mode)
@end lisp

@node Install from Melpa
@section @strong{DONE} Install from Melpa

Divine is not yet available from Melpa. When it will be,

@node Install from Git with Borg
@section @strong{TODO} Install from Git, with Borg

@node Install from Git with Straight
@section @strong{TODO} Install from Git, with Straight

@node A Tour of Divine
@chapter A Tour of Divine

This chapter is an informal introduction to Divine.

@section Starting Divine

To get started, open any buffer you like and make sure you're in
normal mode by running @samp{M-x divine-normal-mode RET}. (Divine tries to
be smart about the mode it starts in, so some buffers may start in
insert mode)

The minor mode lighter shows the active state.  It should display
@samp{Divine<N>}.

@section Basic motion

Basic motion is very close to ordinary Emacs commands: @samp{F} will go
forward one character, @samp{B} backward.  @samp{f} and @samp{b} will move forward
and backward a word, respectively.

With @samp{p} and @samp{n}, you move to the previous
and the next visible line, respectively.  @samp{a} and @samp{e} go to the
beginning and end of the current line, @samp{A} end @samp{E} move through
sentences.

@samp{isearch} is on @samp{s}, @samp{r} for backwards.  @samp{S} and @samp{R} activate regexp
search.

@node Editing with Divine
@chapter Editing with Divine

This section is a complete presentation of the Divine editing
features.  A less formal, but less complete, presentation can be found
in @ref{A Tour of Divine}, which is a recommended read.

People who wish to build their own modal interface over the Divine
core may skip most of this chapter, but should nonetheless read the
description of the fundamental Divine concepts at the top of each node.

@menu
* Motion commands::
* Operators::
* Text objects::
* Actions::
* Modes::
* Commands::
@end menu

@node Motion commands
@section Motion commands

In Divine, a @strong{motion} is a command that moves the point around.
Divine motions are nothing special, and are often regular Emacs
commands.  Motions can be used in two ways.  You can use them like in
regular Emacs, to move around in a buffer.  They can also be combined
with @ref{Operators} to determine the region they operate on.

@menu
* Standard motion commands::
@end menu

@node Standard motion commands
@subsection Standard motion commands

@unnumberedsubsubsec Basic motion

@table @asis
    @kindex b
    @cindex COUNT word(s) forward!
    @item @kbd{b} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT word(s) forward!
    @kindex f
    @cindex COUNT word(s) backward.
    @item @kbd{f} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT word(s) backward.
    @kindex B
    @cindex COUNT words(s) forward, in @code{superword-mode}.
    @item @kbd{B} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT words(s) forward, in @code{superword-mode}.
    @kindex F
    @cindex COUNT words(s) backward, in @code{superword-mode}.
    @item @kbd{F} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT words(s) backward, in @code{superword-mode}.
    @kindex C-B
    @cindex COUNT characters(s) forward.
    @item @kbd{C-B} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT characters(s) forward.
    @kindex C-F
    @cindex COUNT characters(s) backward.
    @item @kbd{C-F} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT characters(s) backward.
    @kindex p
    @cindex COUNT line(s) forward.
    @item @kbd{p} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT line(s) forward.
    @kindex n
    @cindex COUNT line(s) backward.
    @item @kbd{n} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT line(s) backward.
    @kindex p
    @cindex COUNT paragraphs(s) forward.
    @item @kbd{p} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT paragraphs(s) forward.
    @kindex n
    @cindex COUNT paragraphs(s) backward.
    @item @kbd{n} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}COUNT paragraphs(s) backward.
    @kindex a
    @cindex to the first non last character of current line.
    @item @kbd{a} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}to the first non last character of current line.
    @kindex e
    @cindex to the first non blank character of current line.
    @item @kbd{e} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}to the first non blank character of current line.
@end table

@unnumberedsubsubsec Moving by searching

@table @asis
    @kindex t
    @cindex Before COUNTh occurrence of CHAR forward (after if SCOPE).
    @item @kbd{t} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Before COUNTh occurrence of CHAR forward (after if SCOPE).
    @kindex T
    @cindex Before COUNTh occurrence of CHAR backward (after if SCOPE).
    @item @kbd{T} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Before COUNTh occurrence of CHAR backward (after if SCOPE).
    @kindex s
    @cindex isearch forward.
    @item @kbd{s} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}isearch forward.
    @kindex S
    @cindex isearch backward.
    @item @kbd{S} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}isearch backward.
@end table

@unnumberedsubsubsec Moving around balanced expressions

@node Operators
@section Operators

Like Vim and other modal editors, Divine has @strong{operators}.  At their
core, most operators are commands that act on a region.  If a region
is active, invoking an operator will run it on that region, in the
same way Emacs' ordinary @code{*-region} commands act (as an example,
pressing @samp{d} will immediately delete the region).  If no region is
active, though, Divine enters the “pending operator” state.  The
operator is then said to be “pending”, and will run as soon as the
point moves, between its previous and new positions.

@subsection Standard operators

The first three operators' bindings can be pressed twice to operate on
the current line.  For example, @samp{dd} kills the current line.

@table @asis
    @kindex k
    @cindex Kill REGION* to REGISTER@.
    @item @kbd{k} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Kill REGION* to REGISTER@.
    @kindex c
    @cindex Kill REGION* to REGISTER, then enter insert mode.
    @item @kbd{c} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Kill REGION* to REGISTER, then enter insert mode.
    @kindex w
    @cindex Copy REGION* to REGISTER@.
    @item @kbd{w} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Copy REGION* to REGISTER@.

    @kindex w
    @cindex wrap REGION with DELIMITER@.
    @item @kbd{w} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}wrap REGION with DELIMITER@.
    @kindex =
    @cindex indent REGION@.
    @item @kbd{=} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}indent REGION@.
    @kindex SPC o
    @cindex Sort REGION@.
    @item @kbd{SPC o} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Sort REGION@.
@end table

@node Text objects
@section Text objects

A text object is similar to a motion, except that it acts on both the
point and the mark.  There are two types of text objects: @strong{scoped
motions}, which are regular motions with a scope modifier, and @strong{pure
text objects}, which cannot be used as motions.  Some text objects are
also @strong{special}: special text objects replace pending operators with
their own implementation.

@menu
* Scopes and scoped motions::    Using standard motions as text objects
* Pure text objects::            Objects that cannot be use as motions
* Special text object::          The special balanced expression text object
@end menu

@node Scopes and scoped motions
@subsection Scopes and scoped motions

The most common text objects are @strong{scoped motions}.  Standard motions,
 when called with a scope modifier, behave as text objects by moving
 the mark to the beginning of the thing they normally navigate, and
 the point in the normal way.

Divine commands know two standard scopes: @samp{inside} and @samp{around}.
activated by @samp{i} and @samp{ii}, respectively.  Most basic motion commands
respect these scopes, and behave as text objects when one is active.
For example, @samp{di2w} will delete two full words, starting from the one
the point's on.  @samp{da2w} will do the same, also eating the surrounding
space.

@itemize
@item
Key @samp{i}, increase scope.

If no scope is currently active, activate the INSIDE scope.
Otherwise, activate AROUND@.
@end itemize

@node Pure text objects
@subsection Pure text objects

@node Special text object
@subsection Special text object

A special text object is a text object that can replace a pending
operator.  This is meant to let standard operators apply to cases they
weren't designed to.  Divine has only one such text object, @samp{w}, the
balanced expression operator, that can be used to rewrap or unwrap
balanced expressions with the change and delete operator, and no
scope.

@table @asis
    @kindex w
    @cindex Balanced expression text object.
    @item @kbd{w} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Balanced expression text object.
    
Prompt for a pair delimiter, and selects the COUNTh balanced
expression containing the point and bounded by this delimiter.

If SCOPE is @samp{inside}, the contents of the expressions are selected.

If SCOPE is @samp{around}, the delimiters are selected as well.

If no SCOPE, and @samp{divine-kill} or @samp{divine-change} are pending,
they're replaced with @code{divine-unwrap} or @code{divine-rewrap},
respectively.
@end table

@node Actions
@section Actions

Actions are simple commands that don't use the region and cannot be
combined with anything else.  Actions change the value of neither the
point nor the mark, unless they modify the buffer contents (for
example, @samp{y} modifies the point by moving it after the inserted text).

In standard binding evaluation order, actions have the higher priority.

@subsection Standard actions

@table @asis
    @kindex d
    @cindex delete COUNT character(s) forward.
    @item @kbd{d} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}delete COUNT character(s) forward.
    @kindex r
    @cindex replace COUNT character(s) forward with CHAR@.
    @item @kbd{r} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}replace COUNT character(s) forward with CHAR@.
    @kindex RET
    @cindex open line after current line.
    @item @kbd{RET} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}open line after current line.
    @kindex y
    @cindex Insert contents of REGISTER at point, or COUNTh entry in
    @item @kbd{y} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}Insert contents of REGISTER at point, or COUNTh entry in
    kill-ring.
@end table

@node Modes
@section Modes

Divine is a modal interface.  A modal interface is an interface in
which the results of an action is determined by the current mode.
Although Divine provides a complete set modes, this chapter will only
focus on the two most essential: @strong{Normal} and @strong{Insert}.

@itemize
 @item
 @strong{Insert mode}is similar to regular Emacs, except it has a
binding to switch to Normal mode.
@end itemize

@strong{Normal mode} binds single letters to composable action and motion
commands.  It is also the entry point to other modes.

Modes in Divine can be activated permanently or temporarily.
Temporary activation is called @strong{transient}.  A transient mode will
terminate and revert to the previous mode as soon as an action has
completed.

Being transient isn't a property of the mode, but of the activation of
a mode.

@node Commands
@section Commands

A @strong{command} is nothing more than a regular Emacs command, that is, an
@code{(interactive)} function.  Commands can be bound in Divine the same
way they're bound in regular Emacs.  Because Divine underlying
interface is a bit more tricky than Emacs',

@node Extending Divine
@chapter Extending Divine

This chapter describes how you can add create your own operators,
motions, and modes on top of the standard interface.

@menu
* Key bindings::
* Creating actions::
* Creating operators::
* Creating motions and text objects::
* Creating hybrid bindings::
* Using the numeric argument::
@end menu

@node Key bindings
@section Key bindings

@menu
* Adding and removing bindings::
* Keybindings evaluation order::
@end menu

@node Adding and removing bindings
@subsection Adding and removing bindings

Divine has a special keybinding mechanism that allows to easily bind
different commands on the same key, to be selected depending on
context.  For a given key, in a given Divine mode, a binding can be
conditioned by three different predicates, which can be combined:

@itemize
@item
a @strong{mode predicate}, which limits this bindings to a given Emacs mode;

@item
a @strong{type predicate}, which runs this binding when a given Divine
command type is legal (action, motion, object, operator…)

@item
an @strong{arbitrary elisp predicate}, which can be used to further
specialize the binding.
@end itemize

All predicates default to an always-true value; they thus must all
evaluate to non-nil at the moment the user triggers a binding for
their associated command to run.

@defun divine-define-key

Bind KEY to COMMAND in Divine mode MODE@.

MODE is the short name of a Divine mode, like ’normal or ’insert.

STATE is a predicate that depends of the current
interactive state of Divine.  It usually corresponds to the
type of the command.

EMACS-MODE is a symbol identifying an Emacs major or minor
mode.

Bindings are compiled by ‘divine-compile-bindings’, which see.

(fn MODE KEY COMMAND &key ((:mode EMACS-MODE) 't) ((:state STATE) 't) ((:when PRED) 't))
@end defun

@quotation Notice
The @code{:type} of a binding is only used to choose between multiple
bindings on the same key.  It has no effect on the actual command
being run.

@end quotation

@node Keybindings evaluation order
@subsection Keybindings evaluation order

As specified above, binding definitions have three conditions: emacs
mode, binding type, and an arbitrary predicate.

@code{divine-define-key} also sorts binding definitions, so that their
evaluation order is determined and, if possible, makes sense.
Comparing two bindings is done in the following order:

@itemize
@item
Emacs modes are first sorted alphabetically. The special value @code{t},
which enables the binding for all modes and is the default for
@code{:mode}, sorts after everything else, so mode-specific bindings get
evaluated before generic bindings.

@item
If Emacs modes are equal, types are compared by the order they
appear in the car of each element of @code{divine-binding-states}.  The
default magic value for @code{:type}, t, should be present in
@code{divine-binding-states} in last position.  That is, evaluation is
performed in the order specified by this variable.

The default value orders types as follows:

@itemize
@item
@code{action} runs iff the region isn't active and no operator
is pending.

@item
@code{operator} runs iff the region is active or no operator is
pending.

@item
@code{default-motion} runs iff the previous command was called with
the same binding and set an operator as pending.
@end itemize


@item
If types are equal, predicates are compared the same way Emacs mode
are.  At this point, predicates cannot be equal: for a given key on
a given Divine mode, bindings are identified by the triplet (mode,
type, predicate).  Inserting a new binding with the same three
values replace the existing binding.
@end itemize

Bindings are evaluated in the order defined by the variable
@code{divine-binding-types}.

@node Creating actions
@section Creating actions

The easiest way to create an action is the @code{divine-defaction} macro.

@defmac divine-defaction

Define an action NAME for Divine.

An action is similar to an operator that doesn’t need a region.
It is legal whenever an operator is, but is never pending.
@end defmac

@node Creating operators
@section Creating operators

@defmac divine-defoperator

Define a Divine operator NAME with doc DOCSTRING@.

BODY is the code of the operator.  It should work on the region,
whether it’s active or not, by reading (point) and (mark).
Notice that the region may be empty.

Operators need not check anything about the runtime Divine state,
although they can of course access the state variables they need
to adjust their behavior.  To do so, please only use the divine-
accessors, like ‘divine-numeric-argument’, which will correctly
consume the state variables.  Notice that if the operator runs
after having been pending, it will read state after the motion
that created the region, so part of the state may have already
been consumed.
@end defmac

To access the prefix argument from within an operator, see
@ref{Using the numeric argument}.

@node Creating motions and text objects
@section Creating motions and text objects

@node Creating hybrid bindings
@section Creating hybrid bindings

@node Using the numeric argument
@section Using the numeric argument

@node The core Divine framework
@chapter The core Divine framework

Divine was designed with extensibility and modularity in mind.  The
modal user interface Divine provides is implemented on top of a very
abstract core, defined in @samp{divine-core.el}.  This core has no
dependencies besides Emacs itself.  This chapter describes what it
provides, and how you can write custom modal interfaces over it.

@menu
* Starting Divine: Starting Divine (1). 
* Modes and normal modes::
* Creating modes::
* Activating modes::
* State and keeping state::
* Operators and the pending operator state::
* Operator pending mode::
* Mode switching and transient modes::
* Scopes internals::
* Key binding interface internals::
@end menu

@node Starting Divine (1)
@section Starting Divine

Divine is defined as a minor mode, @samp{divine-mode}.

The core is not complete in itself.  You need to provide at least the
@samp{divine-start} function.

@defun divine-start

@samp{divine-mode} calls @samp{divine-start} with no argument to initialize
Divine.  @samp{divine-start} should activate a Divine mode (or calling
@samp{divine-mode} will have no effect) and can do anything needed to
initialize Divine.

In the default interface, divine-start also registers a few hooks,
mostly for visual feedback of the Divine state.
@end defun

@samp{divine-mode} doesn't do much in itself: all it does is install the
hooks Divine needs to work, before running the startup mode.

@node Modes and normal modes
@section Modes and normal modes

Divine command loop is based around a so-called ``normal'' mode.
Although the Divine interface has multiple modes, the whole divine
infrastructure is designed to support one or more ``normal''
modes. Fundamentally, a normal mode is a mode where commands can be
entered in separate parts, typically an action followed by a motion or
an object, but also a register selection or a numeric argument, and so
on.  A typical normal mode command sequence, using the standard Divine
settings, could look like:

@example
" b k a 2 (
┯ ┯ ┯ ┯ ┯ ┯
│ │ │ │ │ └ text object: parenthesized block
│ │ │ │ └ numeric argument
│ │ │ └ "around" object modifier
│ │ └ kill command
│ └ register name
└ register selection command
@end example

This sequence first selects the register the next kill/copy command
will act on, activates the kill command, activates a scope modifier to
make the next motion a text object, a multiplier, then the motion
command to select the previous parentheses. Since there's a scope
modifier, it selects the full parenthesized text, and since there's a
multiplier, it actually selects one more parenthesized group outside
the surrounding one.

@node Creating modes
@section Creating modes

Divine is a set of modes.  The smallest set is made of two modes: a
normal mode and an insertion mode. Ususally, insertion mode does not
use any Divine features: it binds no operators and no scope modifiers,
so it really behaves like regular Emacs, with the exception of one
binding to enter normal mode.

Modes are created using the @samp{divine-defmode} macro.

@defmac divine-defmode

Define the Divine mode NAME, with documentation DOCSTRING@.

NAME is a short identifier, like normal or insert.

The following optional keyword arguments are accepted.

@itemize
@item
‘:cursor’ The cursor style for this mode, as a valid argument
for ‘set-cursor’, which see.

@item
‘:cursor-color’ The cursor color for this mode, as an hex
string or en Emacs color name.

@item
‘:lighter’ The mode lighter.

@item
‘:mode-name’ The actual Emacs mode name.   This defaults to divine-NAME-mode.

@item
‘:rname’ A readable name for the mode, as a string.

@item
‘:transient-fn’ The name of the function used to temporarily activate the mode.
@end itemize

(fn NAME DOCSTRING &key CURSOR CURSOR-COLOR LIGHTER MODE-NAME TRANSIENT-FN RNAME)
@end defmac

@subsection @strong{TODO} Cursor appearance

To make modes visually distinguishable, they can define a cursor appearance.

@node Activating modes
@section Activating modes

Some modes are long-lived ones, others you leave just after you've
entered them. If you enter a mode in pending operator mode, you
probably don't want to stay there. This is why there are three ways to
activate a mode: normal, transient and fragile.

@subsection Normal activation

In @strong{normal activation}, the mode is activated and must be terminated
explicitly.  It deactivates all other Divine modes and behave as the
main mode, until another mode gets activated.

@subsection Transient activation

In @strong{transient activation}, the modes get activated for a single
command, then hands back control to the calling mode.  Transient modes
can be nested (that is, a transient mode can transiently activate
another mode): they'll collapse back to the first non-transient caller
mode.

@subsection Operator-transient activation

It seems natural that modes entered when an operator is pending be
deactivated when the operator gets executed or evaluated.
@strong{operator-transient activation} does exactly this.  This is the
default behavior for all modes.

@defvar divine--transient-stack

Stack of modes to restore after a transient operation.
@end defvar

@node State and keeping state
@section State and keeping state

Divine modes are regular Emacs modes, but to support the
functionalities described above, they're made statuful by
Divine. Hence, Divine modes are always in a given state.  The base
state is identical to regular Emacs:  Keys are bound to functions, and
these functions run normally.

In base Divine, a state is made of the following components, all
optional:

@itemize
@item
The @strong{pending operator}, if any, as described in @ref{Operators and the pending operator state}.

@item
The @strong{numeric prefix argument}, tracked using regular Emacs
mechanisms.

@item
The @strong{scope modifier} argument, as described in @ref{Scopes internals}.
@end itemize

@subsection Keeping state

The main job of Divine regarding state is twofold.  Because the prefix
argument may be passed to a different function than the one that will
ultimately consume it, it must be persisted back for as long as it may
be needed. The other state variables, on the other hand, need to be
erased as soon as a command has been run.

These two operations are performed by a @samp{post-command-hook}, and are
controlled by the variable @samp{divine--continue}, itself controlled by
the function divine-continue.

@defvar divine--continue

 Whether the Divine state must be preserved at the end of the
command loop.  This variable should be set by ‘divine-continue’,
which see.

When inspected interactively, this variable is always nil.
@end defvar

@defun divine-continue

Make unconsumed Divine state variables persist after the current command.
@end defun

In normal use, @samp{divine-continue} is called by actions that
@emph{accumulate} states:

@itemize
@item
Operators, when they register themselves as pending.

@item
Other state functions when the add state, for example a scope
modifier when it's activated.
@end itemize

When @samp{divine--continue}, @samp{divine-post-command-hook} will store back
the digit argument into @samp{prefix-arg}. Other state variables need not
be modified.

@subsection Dropping state

State must not be endlessly persisted, so when @samp{divine--continue} is
@samp{nil} in the @samp{post-command-hook}, all state variables are set back to
@samp{nil} and the value of @samp{prefix-arg} isn't saved back.

@subsection Consuming state

Because a Divine operator can execute two functions that may consume
state, the Divine state accessors @emph{consume} the resource they
return. For example, @samp{divine-numeric-argument} returns the value of
the numeric argument, then drops it, so further calls will return nil.

By convention, accessors have an @samp{&optional noconsume} argument for,
eg, conditions on the presence of the argument before actually
consuming it.  Some, like the numeric argument, also provide accessors
macros that makes common processing easy.

@subsection Creating and registering new state variables

In implementing your own Divine-based commands, you may want to add
new state parameters. To do so, you need to create a function that
will reset those variables to a base value, and add this function
to @samp{divine-clear-state-functions}.

@defvar divine-clear-state-functions

Functions to call for dropping buffer state.

If you add state variables for your custom commands, create a
function to clear them (return them to their initial value) and
add it to this list.  Don’t erase the initial value or you will
break Divine.

Functions in this list should accept, and ignore, any number of
arguments.
@end defvar

@node Operators and the pending operator state
@section Operators and the pending operator state

In Divine, an @strong{operator} is an interactive function, acting on a
region.

When an operator is called (eg, by pressing @samp{k} for @samp{divine-kill}), it
first determines if it should run immediately.  This is done by
calling @samp{divine-run-operator-p}.  At this point, this function will
only return non-nil if there's an active, non-empty region.  If this
is the case, the operator runs immediately between
@samp{(region-beginning)} and @samp{(region-end)}.

Otherwise, it Divine isn't already in pending operator state, it
enters it. The operator name is stored in the variable
@samp{divine--pending-operator}, and state is persisted.

If Divine is already in pending operator state, then two situations may
arise:

@itemize
@item
The same operator is already pending, in which case it is
executed on the default object, as defined by the
@samp{divine-defoperator} macro.

@item
A different operator is pending, and what happens then is
determined by the @samp{divine-operator-conflict-method} variable,
which see.
@end itemize

The operator pending state is terminated by @samp{divine-abort} or by the
next motion command.

@subsection Defining operators

Operators can be defined either from scratch, with the
@samp{divine-defoperator} macro:

@defmac divine-defoperator

Define a Divine operator NAME with doc DOCSTRING@.

BODY is the code of the operator.  It should work on the region,
whether it’s active or not, by reading (point) and (mark).
Notice that the region may be empty.

Operators need not check anything about the runtime Divine state,
although they can of course access the state variables they need
to adjust their behavior.  To do so, please only use the divine-
accessors, like ‘divine-numeric-argument’, which will correctly
consume the state variables.  Notice that if the operator runs
after having been pending, it will read state after the motion
that created the region, so part of the state may have already
been consumed.
@end defmac

Or they can be defined by wrapping an existing action:

@defmac divine-wrap-operator

Wrap the Emacs command COMMAND as a Divine operator.

The resulting operotar is called divine-NAME@.

(fn COMMAND &key)
@end defmac

@node Operator pending mode
@section Operator pending mode

@defvar divine-pre-command-hook

nil
@end defvar

@node Mode switching and transient modes
@section Mode switching and transient modes

@node Scopes internals
@section Scopes internals

The standard scope modifiers @samp{around} and @samp{inside} are not part of the core.  All the core provides is a scope definition macro, @samp{divine-defscope}.

@defmac divine-defscope

Define the Divine scope modifier NAME@.

This macro generates three functions: ‘divine-scope-NAME-select’
to activate the scope if no other scope is already selected,
‘divine-scope-NAME-force’ to activate it, optionally replacing an
existing scope, and ‘divine-scope-NAME-flag’, to read and consume
the scope.
@end defmac

@node Key binding interface internals
@section Key binding interface internals

@node Reading Divine docstrings
@appendix Reading Divine docstrings

Divine docstrings may include one or more of the following
placeholders:

@itemize
 @item
 @code{COUNT}The numeric argument, or 1.

@item
 @code{COUNTh}The numeric argument, or 1, as an ordinal value.

@item
 @code{REGISTER}The register argument.

@item
 @code{REGISTER*}The register argument, or a default, non-register
storage, usually the kill ring.

@item
 @code{SCOPE}The selected scope.  “If SCOPE” means: if a scope is
selected.

@item
 @code{CHAR}A character the command will prompt the user for.

@item
 @code{DELIMITER}Like CHAR, for pairable characters, like (), [], @{@},
etc.
@end itemize

@bye